Hello, everyone. So again, my name is Eduardo Ariño de la Rubia. You can't follow me on
social media anymore because all my accounts are locked down. Too bad. I'm awesome. But
if you want, you can follow me on LinkedIn. So first a disclaimer, this is not a talk
about facts. If you wanted to go to a talk about facts, there's an awesome ggplot talk
going on right now. There's just great talks going on. This is the wrong talk if you wanted
facts. This is a talk about opinions, okay? And they're my opinions. They're not my current
esteemed employer. They're not previous awesome employers. They're not my wife. They're not
my sweet angel mother. This is just me. If you got a problem with me, with my opinions,
let's have it out. Let's have a great discussion. And if you're a scientist working, we had
somebody earlier at a cancer research lab and things like that, this ain't about your
space either. I don't know anything about your space. This is about data science in
business. I think it's also important to give you a little bit of context. I'm sad to report
that I'm no longer an IC. I'm no longer an individual contributor. I'm not even a manager
anymore. It's absolutely repugnant. I'm a manager of managers. You're getting a real
sort of different point of view here than you do from a lot of the practitioners. At
this conference, you've had world-class practitioner after practitioner after practitioner tell
you about the craft that they've honed. This is a totally different perspective. I used
to be one of those folks, and now instead mostly I sit around in meetings and think
about the design of organizations. In the last couple of years, I have built, spun up,
and handed off at least two dozen data science organizations across multiple time zones.
So take it for what you will. And more importantly, any sufficiently advanced trolling is indistinguishable
from thought leadership. This is just a fact, and I'm a cage-fighting referee, so let's
do this. Am I trolling you? Is this real? Let's make it happen.
So of course, as a data science conference, I want to talk about webmasters. Webmasters
existed for a very long time, and tell me if this sounds familiar. They were individuals
who had an incredibly rare set of skills all inside one meat human, and they were
able to do amazing things, and they were incredibly well-paid, and no one really understood what
they did. This is an article from 1997 already saying that these folks are making 60 to 90
grand. I don't know about you, but it's a lot later than 1997, and 90 grand is still
a pretty sweet salary. And so these webmasters existed. And so why did they exist? What did
they do? Every time in technology, there is some fundamental evolution. You find these
roles pop up for some period of time. What webmasters did, if you're old like I am, you
remember working at a business and being like, hey, Stephanie, we need 27 flanges, and Stephanie
would take out a book and go to F for flanges and call or file a purchase order, and that's
how business happened, is human beings were forced to talk to each other and exchange
documents and shit like that, and what happened was that that was incredibly inefficient,
and capitalism demands a push towards efficiency, and so webmasters brought offline businesses
to online. Here is what's happened to webmasters, by the way. This is Google Trends, and it
only goes back to 2008. Imagine what it would look like if we were to look now, but even
2008, 2009, 11, 12, there was still some sort of trend, and there was a massive collapse.
There is no such thing as a webmaster in any real sense. Maybe you've got a little
website and you want to call yourself a webmaster. That's awesome, but the massive set of skills
that were required to transform an entity from offline into online no longer really
exist inside of a single human, so where did they go? It used to be a webmaster. I remember
being a webmaster at a company, and it was me, and there was 1,000 rando IT dudes that
did Lord knows what to keep the COBOL systems going, and all of those people basically have
had to be re-skilled, and now they're a front-end engineer, a back-end engineer, a cloud architect,
a site reliability engineer, a network engineer, a test engineer. The entire world that was
the webmaster role exploded to become what is basically technology careers of today,
not all of them, but a significant number of them. Job titles are fragile. Responsibilities
that prove themselves in adding value to the business become durable. So, the death
of webmasters is actually a story about success. Businesses went online. Instead of changing
online, instead of changing the internet, which happened a little bit, what really happened
was businesses changed. It wasn't a business going online, it was a business transforming
to become an online business. The way that business was done fundamentally changed. Software
ate the world, as that famous quote says, and by software, I mean like this online interconnected
friction-reducing thing that now happens that allows me to take my pocket glass box of horrors
and push a button and get a pizza or a car delivered to me. Business fundamentally changed,
and you couldn't scale that if you were looking for one person or two people who had this
massive set of skills. Okay, so now you're like, cool, we're at your studio conference,
what does this have to do with values and data science beyond models and production?
Hold on, I'm coming to it. Because this is a really interesting chart, right? So, if
you take Google Trends and you overlay webmaster and you overlay data science as a field of
study, they have this really neat intersection that happens shortly after the release of
Google Panda. Do people know what Google Panda is? Google Panda was this massive seismic
shift in which Google said quality matters and we're creating quality guidelines, and
suddenly SEO and SEM advice all overnight disappeared. There were all of these incredible
tricks and tips and people who were making their entire career on you got to do this
thing with the meta keywords and you got to buy these links in this link exchange and
you got to do keyword stuffing and comment spamming and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.
And all of that went away. Google's entire quality algorithm moved to machine learning.
They ended up training massive data sets based on human rated statements of this website
has quality, this website doesn't have quality. SEO advice became try to make good content.
This is a massive shift. Suddenly the entire world of people selling content online and
selling attention online basically became actually like we can't make crap tutorials
and hope that we capture enough time to get somebody to click on some random car ad or
Lord knows what ad. It actually they had to figure out how to make good content and it
turned out that's difficult. So what's the parallel, right? The parallel is that a webmaster
took an offline business and turned it into an online business. A data scientist takes
a process and rules based business and turns it into an algorithmic business. What this
really fundamentally means is they could no longer work on the process of we're going
to stuff these meta keywords, we're going to buy these link exchanges. They had to constantly
be experimenting to understand what is quality, what actually rakes ire, what are the characteristics
of the data that we present and the narrative that we present that actually end up being
incentivized by the Google algorithm. And this happened not just across content businesses
but across basically the entire spectrum of business. Data scientists often turn process
businesses into algorithmic businesses. So here's one of my first hot takes. Data science
hype is not real. It's actually machine learning hype. Okay? And this is where it gets interesting,
right? Why? Because machine learning is the thing that engineers know how to embed into
existing software systems. Data scientists do not have a sustainable advantage over engineers
in producing models of sufficient quality which can be leveraged in production. Right
now in the world there are massive advances happening in how you make machine learning
models when you don't know statistics. Companies are building end-to-end tooling that fundamentally
makes it possible for an engineer to build a good enough model. And data science teams
or organizations which are ML focused, if your data science organization principally
is an organization that makes ML models, you are either going to become an engineering
organization or if we talked right now and I pushed, you would admit that you are an
engineering organization principally or you will be replaced by engineering organizations.
If your data science team focuses on adding value other than models in production, I feel
and predict that your organization is going to flourish. By the way, somebody asked me
what do I mean by production? Production is the set of hardware and software systems where
money is made. That is what I mean by production. There is no other magical concept of production.
And so just as like if you overlay the Google trends of the field of study of data science
and the field of study of machine learning, I understand that the world is full of spurious
correlations but I argue that like this is not one of them. Like the data science hype
cycle is intrinsically tied to the machine learning hype cycle. And let's be clear, today
there's 15,408 data science jobs on monster.com but there's 17,931 machine learning jobs.
So it's one of those things that like I want to keep making this point that actually like
machine learning is not going to be the data scientist's competitive advantage. It is going
to be other aspects of what they do. And lastly, if you don't believe me that you don't
have a competitive advantage, AutoML tools are getting pretty darned good. Here's a tweet
from Erin Liddell. If you don't know her, I believe she's the chief research scientist
at what? Chief machine learning scientist. Thank you very much, audience member. For
H2O, she's absolutely brilliant and she works a lot on AutoML. I believe her PhD was on
ensembling and bagging of models. I don't remember the specifics. Quite frankly, AutoML
is getting pretty darned good. And I hear you saying, oh, but that was a Kaggle dataset.
That wasn't a real world data doesn't look like that. So I've already made the argument
that ML engineers are likely going to take the ML work that data scientists do to add
value. Here's my hot take. There's already a group of people that do this better than
data scientists. It's called a data engineer. A data engineer is a whole field. They've
got a journal, like they exist, right? They develop and construct architecture, data acquisition.
They prepare data for predictive and prescriptive modeling. The idea that data scientists have
some sort of moat around massaging data and making it useful is wrong. At scale, in production,
data engineers have an incredible series of advantages on them. And let's be clear, I believe
that in mature organization, data engineers are the product owners of the data product.
Here's one of my hot takes. Think about the analyses that you do. If to do your analysis,
you're having to join more than a couple of tables. You don't have well-designed data
products and you need a data engineer. So what have we got left? We've taken away ML modeling.
We've taken away the massaging of data. We've taken all these things.
Quit mid-talk summary. I'm not claiming that these responsibilities are going away. As a
matter of fact, if you remember, I said that this is because of the success that these
responsibilities are so durable. I'm actually claiming that much like offline became online
and businesses became online, data-informed is the DNA of the business. I'm definitely
not claiming that data scientist is a bad job. I don't know that the title is going to exist for a
real long time, but the job is freaking awesome, pays real well and allows you to do some amazing
stuff. I'm not claiming, I am claiming that whether it's this year or a few years down the
road, your value will not be ML in production. And this is a side effect of success.
Okay. So now we talk about what do I think data science organizations can do other than
ML in production, right? Where do data scientists have a competitive advantage?
So you've probably heard the phrase that the product managers are the CEO of a product,
right? That's the fundamental theory of the product manager. We have actually a PM
job responsibilities on the left, CEO job responsibilities on the right. It's really
about the scale that you're looking at, right? Are you looking at an individual product or set
of features? Are you looking at the entire company? But realistically, I believe this.
I believe that if you're working in a standard product team, the product manager is the CEO.
Okay. Well, guess what? I believe that data scientists are the CFO of product teams. So
the CFO is responsible in a traditional company for determining and reporting the financial
information. If money is a resource, the CFO is responsible for making sure that that resource
is accounted for appropriately, is going to the right things, that there isn't any weird fraud
or leakage. They are the ones who make decisions about how this resource is allocated. The CFO
is to money like data scientists are to attention and effort. You are the ones who have the
incredible power of deciding what the team focuses on, what the team builds, what the company is
looking to build. This is the key, I believe, of why data scientists responsibilities are
incredibly durable. Does your company really understand what drives its success and
capabilities? Right now, are you prepared to say that you really truly understand exactly why your
company is where it is, where it's going, where it's successful, where it's not? Have you done
the six foundational analyses? Have you done them recently? Can you talk to your company about this
allocation of resources and this true understanding? Have you understood when people use your product,
why they use it and why they stay? Have you understood when people fail to use your product
somehow, how is it they're failing? What happened? How did they get there and were they able to
self-remediate? Have you understood your power users? The fact of the matter is that a power
law distribution almost certainly is happening inside of your product. Do you understand
these power users, the one that are driving your features, they're driving what you're doing?
Do you understand in your experimentation framework why it is that you need to be very
careful about power users because they will dominate the statistics of your A-B tests
if you're not careful and you end up just making your product better and better and better for the
one percent of people who were already never going to leave your product in the first place.
Are you doing enough segmentation analysis? Do you understand where your product is strong,
where your product is weak, which country loves it, which country hates it, which group of people
love it, which group of people hate it? Do you know this? Is it operationalized? Have you done
an ecosystem analysis? Do you understand if for every one minute that is used in hypothetically
our studio, is that negative 30 seconds in Jupyter notebooks, is it incremental to, is it instead of?
What is happening inside of the broader ecosystem that you function? Have you done an inflection
point analysis? Do you understand what it takes to drive long-term growth and adoption, not just
one-step wins? Do you have a large enough hold back that you can understand how a person who
hasn't received any of your treatments over a year is different how a person who's received
every marketing message over the previous year? Do you have this deep understanding
about where the resources, the attention, and the skills of your organization are being spent?
To get real specific now, like what are the ways that data orgs add value? Number one is metric
design. Are you monitoring what you should? Do you have the right metrics in place? Does your
metric actually measure not just the immediate value of an A-B test, but the longitudinal value?
Do you have the right counter metrics in place? Is it possible that you're increasing the click
through rate, but destroying the adoption or destroying the renewal? Do you have the basket
of metrics? Do you have proven time and time again that have the characteristics to help you
by being real proxies to the things that are stated in your company values?
Maybe, maybe not. Do you measure right? Are you sure you're logging everything well? Do you work
with your engineers to make sure that at every single screen, everything is logged so that all
of your experiments aren't actually telling you something about the data generating process of
improper logging as opposed to actually what the users experience really, really, I'm loving the
nods, by the way. Those of you nodding like you're giving me life, right? No, this is a big
deal. If you're not measuring properly, if you're not measuring consistently, you're always chasing
noise. Your organization is not chasing any signal. Goaling, I actually believe, is the single thing
that data science organizations need to own with ferocity. There is no more powerful thing in
organizing a group of people to take a mountain, take an objective, or do an audacious thing than
a goal that is at this perfect sweet spot of audacious but believable. Do you as an organization
have a formal praxis for determining what is a 50-50 goal, a goal that you will not hit half the
time, a 90-10 goal, a 10-90 goal? Do you understand which one of the metrics you should actually goal
on? Do you understand whether you should be going on the operational metrics or the tracking metrics?
Do you have all of this in place? Is it a road machine that adds value to the business every
quarter, every half? I wanted to actually point out, I said no values in production. That's not
the models, but you're still going to be doing modeling. Modeling is still going to be an
important part of your life, right? Sometimes you still need to make a model that can be the best
way to size an opportunity to understand what's going on. Thank you, I see the time. You're going
to end up doing it, and R is a fantastic tool to make these incredibly fast models, to make them
quickly, and to be able to educate the business. More stuff. Are you creating enough self-service
tools every time that you are getting feedback from a business partner that you need
something done? Are you asking yourself, is now the appropriate time to turn this into something
that we leverage? Just a quick shout out here to RStudio Connect. I think that is a fantastic tool
for our organizations that are trying to do this exact thing, but if you're not building self-service
tools as part of your practice, you're leaving value to the organization on the table. Prioritization.
Any one engineering company, any one company building a thing can build a hundred different
features onto the thing. How are you choosing which one should be built? On average ratio,
and I'm not saying it's a good or bad ratio, for every one data scientist, analytics person,
whatever you want to call them, there's a minimum of 10 engineers. Let's make that clear. Standard
Silicon Valley salary, that's $2 million worth of salary, right? 10 times $200,000. That one data
scientist driving the prioritization of those 10 Silicon Valley engineers is making the choice
whether $2 million worth of human capital is building a feature that is going to be good,
or a feature that is actually not going to be used, or a feature that people don't really want,
right? Off of all of the analysis we did earlier, which is a thing that you do via opportunity
sizing. Like I said, there's 10 things that can be done, but which one should be, right? Are you
working on a feature that only your power users are going to use? Are you using on a feature that
is going to be a fundamental lever to the sustained adoption of your product? If you're
not doing that opportunity sizing, you're not being a good CFO of your company, and obviously
experimentation, right? It's incredible. I'm not going to do a show of hands things, but if you've
ever worked with an engineer who set up an A-B test and said, oh yeah, but we made it real easy
for people to opt in and opt out of the A-B test. Have you had that experience? Have you had to
explain to them how they no longer have an A-B test, how there's no longer an experiment there,
and all that you're measuring is now bias? You as the data science organization add that value
by being the people who make sure that experiments are actually meaningful.
And how do data orgs add value? Hey, there's this little thing called ethics. Oftentimes,
data scientists in an organization are the ones who have the most training on ethical decision
making. It's just a fact. If you look at an engineering curriculum, at least when I did my
undergrad computer science curriculum, there was one one-hour class on ethics in which we learned
about utilitarianism and deontology. It was not exactly a useful course. Data scientists have
oftentimes in graduate school worked with real human subjects. If you haven't, if you have,
great. If you haven't, you need to learn about this because almost certainly somewhere in your
value chain there's humans. Check out the Menlo report for really great principles on ethics,
respect for persons, beneficence, justice, and respect for law and public interest. This is
something that as a data organization, you can add a lot of value to your company by making sure
that your experiments, your prioritization, your goal is always being done from an ethical
perspective. Wrapping up, the future of the data science is the future of business. There is no
difference. You as data scientists add value by making every part of that business data informed.
That is our competitive advantage, and that is the value other than another freaking model
in production that you are adding to the business. My two little pitches, if you haven't
read these two books, read these two books. If you don't know how to, if you've never taken formal
negotiation coursework, learn it. These are the two most important books that I can suggest to
you right now because in all of these things that I've discussed, how the data science teams add
value, it's through communication, negotiation, and influence, and these will be superpowers.
And last but not least, hey, fist bumps, all right? There's a global epidemic right here,
so no high fives, no handshaking, fist bumps against Wuhan coronavirus. So thank you for
your time. I am hiring. I'm looking for data scientists in the Bay Area, Seattle, and Zurich.
Feel free to email me at iorino at gmail.com. Thank you.
Thank you, Eduardo. We have time for one question, and it's the most popular one on this
list, and it's coming from Concerned Data Scientist. What are the fundamental differences
between a regular organization and an engineering organization?
So what does an engineering organization do? Engineering is the praxis of how,
right? Engineering cares about how things are done, not why they are done, right? And so what
is an engineering organization? An engineering organization cares deeply about how and cares
deeply about the creation of artifacts that they themselves have some life afterwards,
either it be a piece of code, it be usually a piece of code, or a piece of hardware. That's
usually a piece of code or a piece of hardware. That's one of the fundamental differences,
is that at the end of the day, you want to be a data scientist. My guess is you want to ask
questions about causality. You want to ask why questions. You want to understand deeper. If
you're in an engineering organization, it's fine, but expect to spend your life answering how
questions. Thank you very much. Thank you, everyone, for attending this segment.
Thank you.